On the authority of Sufyan bin Abdullah (may Allah be pleased with him) who said:

    "I said, 'O Messenger of Allah, tell me something about Islam which I can ask of no one but you.' He (peace be upon him) said, 'Say "I believe in Allah" — and then be steadfast.'"

[Muslim]

عَنْ أَبِي عَمْرٍو وَقِيلَ: أَبِي عَمْرَةَ سُفْيَانَ بْنِ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ رَضِيَ اللهُ عَنْهُ قَالَ:

    "قُلْت: يَا رَسُولَ اللَّهِ! قُلْ لِي فِي الْإِسْلَامِ قَوْلًا لَا أَسْأَلُ عَنْهُ أَحَدًا غَيْرَك؛ قَالَ: قُلْ: آمَنْت بِاَللَّهِ ثُمَّ اسْتَقِمْ"

[رَوَاهُ مُسْلِمٌ].

Relationship Between Istiqamah (Steadfastness) and Istighfaar (Seeking Forgiveness)

قُلْ إِنَّمَآ أَنَا۠ بَشَرٌ مِّثْلُكُمْ يُوحَىٰٓ إِلَىَّ أَنَّمَآ إِلَٰهُكُمْ إِلَٰهٌ وَٰحِدٌ فَٱسْتَقِيمُوٓا۟ إِلَيْهِ وَٱسْتَغْفِرُوهُ ۗ وَوَيْلٌ لِّلْمُشْرِكِينَ

“Say, O [Muhammad], ‘I am only a man like you to whom it has been revealed that your god is but one God; so take a straight course to Him (be steadfast) and seek His forgiveness.’ And woe to those who associate others with Allah.” (Qur’an, Surah Fussilat, 41:6)

The verse informs us we are going to try to be steadfast, but at times we may encounter shortcomings. So, Istighfar (seeking forgiveness) is essential in the process of steadfastness and fulfilling our proclamation of faith.

Anas bin Malik reports the Prophet (sas) said: “The belief of a servant will not be steadfast until his heart becomes steadfast, and his heart will not become steadfast until his tongue becomes steadfast”. (Imam Ahmad)
Having Istiqamah May Require Opposing Societal Norms & Culture

Having Istiqamah, steadfastness in obeying Allah, may require one to differentiate and not practice the incorrect customs, traditions, and cultural practices of the people. Due to this, the Prophet(s) said, “Be steadfast (in your actions) and do not count (your good actions, which may cause you to limit them). And know that the best of your actions is the Prayer, and none except the Believer takes care to maintain his wudu”.

It was said, “al-Istiqamah is a trait such that with it all the good qualities are perfected, and without it all are disfigured.” Al-Wasiti (rh).
