Why Porn Is Full Of Lies


In porn, everything—from the way people look, to the way they have sex—is a fantasy. Porn consumers often become so obsessed chasing the fantasy that they miss out on actual love and relationships.

Back in the 1950s, two researchers named Tinbergen and Magnus played a trick on butterflies.  (See How Porn Hurts A Consumer’s Partner.) The idea that “porn is a personal decision that affects no one else” is simply wrong.

But even if your partner has no problem with porn, it can still damage your relationship. Studies have clearly shown that porn erodes a person’s ability to love and feel loved with a real partner.  (See How Porn Damages Consumers’ Sex Lives.)

One recent study examined men who used internet porn compulsively and found that, in 11 out of 19 subjects, porn consumption had lowered their sex drive and/or ability to maintain erections in physical relationships with real women.  Chances are, your partner is not okay with that.
Porn Lie #2
Porn is just watching people have sex—what could be more natural and normal than that?

Actually, sex is natural and normal. Porn is something entirely different.

Make no mistake, porn is a product. Pornographers have a lot to gain by driving traffic to their sites, so they dress up their product to grab your attention. That “dressing up” is exactly what makes porn so unnatural.

Professional porn performers have a whole team of people to make every detail look perfect, from directing and filming to lighting and makeup, maybe even a plastic surgeon or two to thank. With some careful editing, a typical 45-minute porn flick that took three days to shoot can appear to have happened all at once, without a break. Film the right bodies from the right angles at the right moments, edit out all the mistakes, Photoshop away any imperfections, add a catchy soundtrack, and you have something most definitely NOT like “natural” sex with “normal” people. You end up with something more “cardboard” than “butterfly.”
Porn Lie #3
Porn is just an innocent distraction and a harmless pastime.

Leading relationship experts, Doctors John and Julie Gottman have expressed serious concern about the effects of pornography on couple relationships. They explain, “Pornography may be just such a supernormal stimulus. With pornography use, much more of a normal stimulus may eventually be needed to achieve the response a supernormal stimulus evokes. In contrast, ordinary levels of the stimulus are no longer interesting. This may be how normal sex becomes much less interesting for porn users. The data supports this conclusion. In fact, use of pornography by one partner leads the couple to have far less sex and ultimately reduces relationship satisfaction.”

Once a person is aware of the damage they are doing to themselves, (See How Porn Changes the Brain) their loved ones (See How Porn Hurts A Consumer’s Partner,) and society (See How Porn Fuels Sex Trafficking), using porn can hardly be called harmless or innocent.
Porn Lie #4
Porn is a safe way to learn about sex.

This lie is especially troubling because many young porn consumers really do rely on the warped fantasy of porn to form their ideas and expectations about sex.  (See How Porn Affects Sexual Tastes.) And as people adopt the unrealistic standards of porn, they end up feeling bad about themselves  (See How Porn Warps Ideas About Sex.) Amateur porn, which claims to be more natural and real, actually teaches the same attitudes and reproduces the same false stereotypes as professionally produced porn—sometimes worse!  (See Why Porn Leaves Consumers Lonely.) Tinbergen’s butterflies were simply reacting to instinct when they were fooled by the “supermodel decoys,” but humans are not victims of their evolution. You can choose to recognize porn for the deception it is. You can reject porn’s lies and choose real life, real relationships, and real love.

